Hey guys! It’s Phil from smilinggardener.com
and today I’m going to show you, to do something
called rock mulching. First while I’m standing
by my garden here I might as well show you
the progress, things are starting to grow.
I have some tomato support, you can see it
up around there, there’s my little path
and I got a nice new little sidewalk in here
and things are starting to grow. But still
not much exciting going on it’s little bit
too early in the spring and it’s been cold
and rainy and so we need some warmth for things
to really start taking off but I’m pretty
excited about this garden this year.
So rock mulching. You know, I don’t generally
recommend you using a stone or rocks as a
mulch in your garden and the main problem
with that is that they don’t let organic
matter be recycled back into the soil which
is one of the most important goals for us
in the garden is to improve the organic matter
content of the soil.
So that’s gonna be in the fall, we want
to have the leaves that fall from the trees
and the plants, we want them to be incorporated
back in to the soil like nature does right
every fall.
We want to bring compost in every year or
a couple of years and things like that. So
stones stop all these process from happening
and they just, they just stop all the nutrients
cycling and organic matter replenishment process
in the soil.
But there is one time that I, that I used
rocks and it’s called rock mulching for
some reason which to me just sound mulching
with rocks but it’s not. What it is, is
it’s, oh! That’s a nice lilac out there,
coz it does not look as cool in the camera.
I haven’t notice that yet.
Sorry I got distracted so, so rock mulching
is when we, usually around a very important
new plant like a young fruit tree or something
that we have, you make sure you have a nice
bed around the tree.
Put down a bunch of leaves like a few inches
of leaves on that bed and then put some rocks
on top, not little rocks but like bigger rocks
or flagstones which I’ve done and I, I,
here I can show you because I have done it
to a pear tree here.
Well, I actually show you that coz I was recording
this yesterday in a video for the academy.
I so, I’ll show you the process of, from
start to finish, so what happen is first you
make sure the bed is good then you put this
nice layer of leaves in there, a few inches
of leaves then you cover it up with rocks
and what happen is normally those leaves would
take, you know 6 to 8 months to break down
something like that.
But with the rocks on there it happens in
a couple of months and what that means is
that I can add another few inches of leaves
in a couple of months; and I can do that a
few times this year and that’s really where
you get the benefits by doing this a few times
in a year.
So the rocks really, it’s like they’re,
it’s like they’re making these leaves
compost much more quickly, improving the organic
matter content of the soil and people have
proposed different reasons why the rocks might
do that.
You know, it could be that a, that just the
pressure exerted to the leaves get them more
in contact of the soil food web and the earthworms
and molasses and break down faster. It could
be that the rocks are for protections for
earth worms coz there’s certainly an explosion
of earthworms under there once this rocks
get on there.
It could be that they, you know the heat that
the rocks get during the day from the sun
is radiated back out at night allowing for
a more smooth, a longer breakdown by the soil
food web and which is more heat in there so
there’s a longer work day for them.
Could be that there’s, there’s definitely
gonna be more moisture in there with the rocks
there to hold the moisture in so I, it’s
probably all of these reasons together, I’m
not sure but I do know that these leaves are
gonna disappear very quickly and what’s
gonna happen is by the end of this year when
I’ve done this a few times the soil is going
to be beautiful under their full of worm casting
and it’s, it’s gonna be a rich beautiful
soil.
And I expecting at the top growth is gonna
be, when I’ve done this at the past the
top growth is going to be nice and I’m hoping
will get some pears here for the first time,
nice edible pears, and so that’s, that’s
rock mulching.
You know it’s this way that we use rocks
to help facilitates the breakdown, the fast
breakdown of leaves on a very important tree
or if you’ve planted a few tree or a small
orchards like that.
I think that’s all I wanted to talk about
today about rock mulching. Oh! There’s another
lilac, I, I gotta start looking around here
more and I’m at my parents place.
So, so that’s all so if you haven’t picked
out my 15 vital lessons from, for becoming
a better organic gardener you can do that
at smilinggardener.com and other than that
I hope you can get doing some rock mulching.
You know obviously the fall is when you, your
leaves are going to be there but if you have
some left over like I did you can start this
in the spring and do it a few times this year.
So I hope you have a good rest of the day
and I’ll be back next week talking about
something else.